Enums blog (#4786)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/announcing-enum-support/index.md

{{< choosable language typescript >}}

```typescript
import * as pulumi from "@pulumi/pulumi";
import { s3 } from "@pulumi/aws";

const myBucket = new s3.Bucket("myBucket", { acl: s3.CannedAcl.Private });
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

```python
import pulumi
from pulumi_aws import s3

my_bucket = s3.Bucket("myBucket", acl=s3.CannedAcl.PRIVATE)
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

```csharp
using Pulumi;
using S3 = Pulumi.Aws.S3;

class MyStack : Stack
{
    public MyStack()
    {
        var myBucket = new S3.Bucket("myBucket", new S3.BucketArgs
        {
            Acl = S3.CannedAcl.Private,
        });
    }
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

```go
package main

import (
    "github.com/pulumi/pulumi-aws/sdk/v3/go/aws/s3"
    "github.com/pulumi/pulumi/sdk/v2/go/pulumi"
)

func main() {
    pulumi.Run(func(ctx *pulumi.Context) error {
        myBucket, err := s3.NewBucket(ctx, "myBucket", &s3.BucketArgs{
            Acl: s3.CannedAclPrivate,
        })
        if err != nil {
            return err
        }
        return nil
    })
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}

> The enum properties provide discoverable and normalized constants that can be used in place of raw strings, allowing you to move faster with the added boosts of IDE tooling like type hints and autocomplete.

Reviewer: A few thoughts for additions:
1. A short animated GIF (or even just screenshot) of a completion list showing the valid values, with help text - and discussion of the discoverability benefits
2. A screenshot of an error squiggle under a typo'd string value being passed - and discussion of how this helps catches errors *much* faster, instead of waiting until the code is deployed
3. A note on the strict vs. loose enums, and how we've modelled both of these - applying them to different cases to balance flexibility and improved error checking / discoverability.
4. To the point in the next paragraph - perhaps a quick note on where enums are available now (and in what forms - perhaps a list of a few enums for each of AWS and Azure NextGen?), as well as a hint that we'll be adding more enums across the Pulumi SDKs in the coming months.

const myBucket = new s3.Bucket("myBucket", { acl: "private" });
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

```python
import pulumi
from pulumi_aws import s3

my_bucket = s3.Bucket("myBucket", acl="private")
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

```csharp
using Pulumi;
using S3 = Pulumi.Aws.S3;

class MyStack : Stack
{
    public MyStack()
    {
        var myBucket = new S3.Bucket("myBucket", new S3.BucketArgs
        {
            Acl = "private",
        });
    }
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

```go
package main

import (
    "github.com/pulumi/pulumi-aws/sdk/v3/go/aws/s3"
    "github.com/pulumi/pulumi/sdk/v2/go/pulumi"
)

func main() {
    pulumi.Run(func(ctx *pulumi.Context) error {
        myBucket, err := s3.NewBucket(ctx, "myBucket", &s3.BucketArgs{
            Acl: pulumi.String("private"),
        })
        if err != nil {
            return err
        }
        return nil
    })
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

In the above code, the S3 `Bucket` resource has a property called `acl`, where we pass in the string `private` to indicate that this is a private bucket.

> If we look at the [resource docs](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/pkg/aws/s3/bucket/#acl_nodejs), we can see that the `acl` property can only be set to one of a few different values: `private`, `public-read`, `public-read-write`, `aws-exec-read`, `authenticated-read` and `log-delivery-write`. The `acl` property is the perfect candidate for an enum type and is now emitted as one, so you can use the following code instead.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we look at the [resource docs](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/pkg/aws/s3/bucket/#acl_nodejs), we can see that the `acl` property can only be set to one of a few different values: `private`, `public-read`, `public-read-write`, `aws-exec-read`, `authenticated-read`, and `log-delivery-write`. The `acl` property is the perfect candidate for an enum type and is emitted as one, so you can use the following code instead.
```

```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

```python
import pulumi
from pulumi_aws import s3

my_bucket = s3.Bucket("myBucket", acl=s3.CannedAcl.PRIVATE)
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

```csharp
using Pulumi;
using S3 = Pulumi.Aws.S3;

class MyStack : Stack
{
    public MyStack()
    {
        var myBucket = new S3.Bucket("myBucket", new S3.BucketArgs
        {
            Acl = S3.CannedAcl.Private,
        });
    }
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

```go
package main

import (
    "github.com/pulumi/pulumi-aws/sdk/v3/go/aws/s3"
    "github.com/pulumi/pulumi/sdk/v2/go/pulumi"
)

func main() {
    pulumi.Run(func(ctx *pulumi.Context) error {
        myBucket, err := s3.NewBucket(ctx, "myBucket", &s3.BucketArgs{
            Acl: s3.CannedAclPrivate,
        })
        if err != nil {
            return err
        }
        return nil
    })
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

## IDE Superpowers

Enum properties provide discoverable and normalized constants that can be used in place of raw strings, allowing you to move faster with the added boosts of IDE tooling like type hints and autocomplete.

> By using the provided constants, you can avoid having to refer back to documentation to remember the valid values and save precious moments in the development cycle that would be lost to debugging errors caused by typos.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the provided constants, you can avoid referring back to the documentation to remember the valid values and save precious moments in the development cycle that would be lost to debugging errors caused by typos.
```

{{< chooser >}}
{{< choosable language typescript >}}

![ENUM_TYPESCRIPT](ts-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

![ENUM_PYTHON](python-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

![ENUM_CSHARP](csharp-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

![ENUM_GO](go-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

## Optimized for flexibility

> While some properties make sense as "strict" enums (i.e. the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values), there are times when it would be beneficial to have constants for commonly used values without restricting the input to **only** those values. We call this second category "relaxed" enums, and we model them a little differently in our schema.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While some properties make sense as "strict" enums (i.e,. the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values), there are times when it would be beneficial to have constants for commonly used values without restricting the input to **only** those values. We call this second category "relaxed" enums, and we model them a little differently in our schema.
```

Author: @spara this one doesn't look quite right. did you mean `i.e.,`?

### "Strict" enums

> A property is a "strict" enum when the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values. In this case, the property type is specified as the enum type. Currently, only the Azure NextGen provider uses "strict" enums as the OpenAPI specification defines the properties as such.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A property is a "strict" enum when the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values. In this case, the property type is specified as the enum type. Currently, only the Azure NextGen provider uses "strict" enums as the OpenAPI specification defines its properties.
```

{{< chooser >}}
{{< choosable language typescript >}}

```typescript
// Add lang-specific representation of a strict enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

```python
# Add lang-specific representation of a strict enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

```csharp
// Add lang-specific representation of a strict enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

```go
// Add lang-specific representation of a strict enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

### "Relaxed" enums

> When a property is a "relaxed" enum, the property type is specified as the `Union` of the enum type and the underlying primitive type. This means that you have the convenience of using the enum constants (i.e. `s3.CannedAcl.Private`), but you may also pass in the raw string (i.e. `"private"`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a property is a "relaxed" enum, the property type is specified as the `Union` of the enum type and the underlying primitive type. This means that you have the convenience of using the enum constants (i.e., `s3.CannedAcl.Private`), but you may also pass in the raw string (i.e., `"private"`).
```

> In the AWS provider (and other Terraform-based providers) we have opted for **only** using "relaxed" enums. The reasoning here is twofold. Allowing the primitive type maintains backwards compatibility and also allows users to use values which may not yet be represented in the Pulumi schema (e.g. a new Managed Policy ARN, EC2 Instance type, etc.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the AWS provider (and other Terraform-based providers), we have opted for **only** using "relaxed" enums. The reasoning here is twofold. Allowing the primitive type maintains backward compatibility and allows users to use values that may not yet be represented in the Pulumi schema (e.g., a new Managed Policy ARN, EC2 Instance type, etc.).
```

{{< chooser >}}
{{< choosable language typescript >}}

```typescript
// Add lang-specific representation of a relaxed enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

```python
# Add lang-specific representation of a relaxed enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

```csharp
// Add lang-specific representation of a relaxed enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

```go
// Add lang-specific representation of a relaxed enum property
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

## Try them out!

> You can find enum types integrated into v3.19.0 of the AWS provider, and v0.3.0 of the Azure NextGen provider.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find enum types integrated into v3.19.0 of the AWS provider and v0.3.0 of the Azure NextGen provider.
```

> In the Azure NextGen provider, all properties labelled as enums in the OpenAPI spec are represented as such. On the other hand, the enums for the AWS provider are manually identified and maintained as part of the [provider schema](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-aws/blob/master/provider/resources.go#L2392-L3375).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Azure NextGen provider, all properties labeled as enums in the OpenAPI spec are represented as such. On the other hand, the AWS provider enums are manually identified and maintained as part of the [provider schema](https://github.com/pulumi/pulumi-aws/blob/master/provider/resources.go#L2392-L3375).
```

> We've already added many that you might find useful, such as Lambda Runtimes, EC2 Instance Types and IAM Managed Policies, and will continue to add more across our provider SDKs in the coming months.

Reviewer 3: I would restructure the above paragraphs to have one about AWS and one Azure. For Azure, we may throw a fancy stat like "we have 1000 enums and 5000 enum values for you" (I made up the numbers, should be an easy query at the schema level).

> We've already added many that you might find useful, such as Lambda Runtimes, EC2 Instance Types and IAM Managed Policies, and will continue to add more across our provider SDKs in the coming months.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We've already added many that you might find useful, such as Lambda Runtimes, EC2 Instance Types, and IAM Managed Policies, and will continue to add more across our provider SDKs in the coming months.
```

---
title: "Announcing Cross-Language Enum Support"

> date: 2020-12-14

Reviewer: Might want to update this to be today.

Author: It is today. I'm guessing you mean whichever today that this actually goes out on?

Reviewer: Yeah - sorry - my bad - I was reviewing based on an earlier preview link.

draft: true
meta_desc: "Cross-language enum support provides a quality-of-life improvement to the development experience."
meta_image: meta.png
authors:
- komal-ali
tags:
- enums
- python
- go
- c#
- typescript
---

> Here at Pulumi, we believe in leveraging the best features of programming languages to create a delightful development experience for our users. Today, we continue our contributions in this area by announcing cross-language support for `enum` types in our provider SDKs.

Reviewer: Perhaps?

```suggestion
Here at Pulumi, we believe in leveraging the best features of programming languages to create a delightful development experience for our users. Today, we continue our contributions in this area by announcing cross-language support for `enum` types in our provider SDKs, available in all Pulumi languages - Python, TypeScript, .NET and Go.
```

)

func main() {
    pulumi.Run(func(ctx *pulumi.Context) error {
        myBucket, err := s3.NewBucket(ctx, "myBucket", &s3.BucketArgs{
            Acl: s3.CannedAclPrivate,
        })
        if err != nil {
            return err
        }
        return nil
    })
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

## IDE Superpowers

Enum properties provide discoverable and normalized constants that can be used in place of raw strings, allowing you to move faster with the added boosts of IDE tooling like type hints and autocomplete.

Using the provided constants, you can avoid referring back to the documentation to remember the valid values and save precious moments in the development cycle that would be lost to debugging errors caused by typos.

{{< chooser >}}
{{< choosable language typescript >}}

![ENUM_TYPESCRIPT](ts-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

![ENUM_PYTHON](python-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

![ENUM_CSHARP](csharp-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

![ENUM_GO](go-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

## Optimized for flexibility

> While some properties make sense as "strict" enums (i.e., the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values), there are times when it would be beneficial to have constants for commonly used values without restricting the input to **only** those values. We call this second category "relaxed" enums, and we model them a little differently in our schema.

Reviewer: The schema is quite an "internal implementation detail".  The interesting question for users is more how this difference maps to how these are represented in each of the languages they will use - right?

Author: Yeah, I get that. I went down the path of writing out the representation in each of the languages but it was getting super caveat-y (In Go, relaxed enums are not represented any differently than regular ol' string types). I decided to just go with the json representation because it was feeling a little bit like there were too many things that may need explanations. I can go back and redo it if you feel like that would really help.

Reviewer: I see. If you think this is better than what we could do with language-based examples - definitely happy to leave as is here.

Author: Heh, I actually went ahead and added the language-based examples in the latest commit. Let me know if you think it's better. I do still need to add some sort of explainer for Go re: relaxed enums. Trying to figure out the balance of "enough information to make sense but not too much to overwhelm"

### "Strict" enums

> A property is a "strict" enum when the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values. In this case, the property type is specified as the enum type. Currently, only the Azure NextGen provider uses "strict" enums as the OpenAPI specification explicitly defines its properties as such.

Reviewer: Perhaps leave this detail to the section where you talk about where enums are currently supported?  

The note to add here might be to highlight that we will use "strict" enums when we are sure that the enum will include all legal values, such as when the provider is auto-generated from a specification provided by the cloud provider - like for our Azure NextGen or Kubernetes providers (with links to blog posts on how these work?).

When a property is a "relaxed" enum, the property type is specified as the `Union` of the enum type and the underlying primitive type. This means that you have the convenience of using the enum constants (i.e., `s3.CannedAcl.Private`), but you may also pass in the raw string (i.e., `"private"`).

In the AWS provider (and other Terraform-based providers), we have opted for **only** using "relaxed" enums. The reasoning here is twofold. Allowing the primitive type maintains backward compatibility and also allows users to use values that may not yet be represented in the Pulumi schema (e.g., a new Managed Policy ARN, EC2 Instance type, etc.).

```json5
{
  "resources": {
    "aws:s3/bucket:Bucket": {
      "inputProperties": {
        "acl": {
          "oneOf": [
            {
              "type": "string"
            },
            {
              "$ref": "#/types/aws:s3/CannedAcl:CannedAcl"
            },
          ]
        },
      },
    },
  },
  "types": {
    "aws:s3/CannedAcl:CannedAcl": {
      "type": "string",
      "enum": [
        {
          "name": "Private",
          "value": "private"
        },
        ...
      ],
    },
  },
}
```

## Try them out!

> You can find enum types integrated into v3.19.0 of the AWS provider and v0.3.0 of the Azure NextGen provider.

Reviewer: Perhaps cross link these (or another reference to the provider names) to the docs site?

```suggestion
You can find enum types integrated into `v3.19.0` of the AWS provider and `v0.3.0` of the Azure NextGen provider.
```

> You can find enum types integrated into v3.19.0 of the AWS provider and v0.3.0 of the Azure NextGen provider.

Reviewer: Perhaps add that we will be adding enums to other providers over the coming weeks and months.

                 resource_name: str,
                 acl: Optional[pulumi.Input[Union[str, 'CannedAcl']]] = None,
                 ...):
        ...

```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

```csharp
namespace Pulumi.Aws.S3
{
    public partial class Bucket : Pulumi.CustomResource
    {
        public Bucket(string name, BucketArgs? args = null, ...)
        {
        }
    }

    public sealed class BucketArgs : Pulumi.ResourceArgs
    {
        [Input("acl")]
        public InputUnion<string, Pulumi.Aws.S3.CannedAcl>? Acl { get; set; }

        ...
    }
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

```go
func NewBucket(ctx *pulumi.Context,
name string, args *BucketArgs, ...) (*Bucket, error) {
    ...
}

type BucketArgs struct {
    Acl pulumi.StringPtrInput
    ...
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

## Try them out!

You can find enum types integrated into `v3.19.0` of the [AWS provider](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/pkg/aws/) and `v0.3.0` of the [Azure NextGen provider](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/reference/pkg/azure-nextgen/), and we will be adding enums to other providers in the coming weeks and months.

> **Azure NextGen**: In the Azure NextGen provider, all properties labeled as enums in the OpenAPI spec are represented as such. In all, there are over 1300 enums provided in the SDKs. The Azure NextGen provider uses "strict" enums since the OpenAPI specification explicitly defines its properties as such.

Reviewer 3: > The Azure NextGen provider uses "strict" enums since the OpenAPI specification

Am I misreading this? Most enums in Azure NG are actually relaxed.

Author: Yeah I guess it's unclear because of the refactoring that @lukehoban requested. I can just take it out. I was trying to make a point that NG is the only place strict enums are used currently.

Author: I clarified that it uses both. Let me know if you still see any issues.

Using the provided constants, you can avoid referring back to the documentation to remember the valid values and save precious moments in the development cycle that would be lost to debugging errors caused by typos.

{{< chooser >}}
{{< choosable language typescript >}}

![ENUM_TYPESCRIPT](ts-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

![ENUM_PYTHON](python-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

![ENUM_CSHARP](csharp-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

![ENUM_GO](go-enum.gif)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

## Optimized for flexibility

While some properties make sense as "strict" enums (i.e., the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values), there are times when it would be beneficial to have constants for commonly used values without restricting the input to **only** those values. We call this second category "relaxed" enums, and we model them a little differently in our SDKs.

### "Strict" enums

A property is a "strict" enum when the input value **must** be one of the enumerated values. In this case, the property type is specified as the enum type.

> We will use "strict" enums when we are sure that the enum will include all legal values, such as when a provider is auto-generated from a specification provided by the cloud provider (like our [Azure NextGen](https://www.pulumi.com/blog/announcing-nextgen-azure-provider/) or [Kubernetes](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/intro/cloud-providers/kubernetes/#pulumi-kubernetes-provider) providers).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will use "strict" enums when we are sure that the enum will include all legal values, such as when a provider is auto-generated from a cloud provider specification (like our [Azure NextGen](https://www.pulumi.com/blog/announcing-nextgen-azure-provider/) or [Kubernetes](https://www.pulumi.com/docs/intro/cloud-providers/kubernetes/#pulumi-kubernetes-provider) providers).
```

    ...
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language python >}}

```python
class StorageAccount(pulumi.CustomResource):
    def __init__(__self__,
                 resource_name: str,
                 access_tier: Optional[pulumi.Input['AccessTier']] = None,
                ...):
        ...
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language csharp >}}

```csharp
namespace Pulumi.AzureNextGen.Storage.Latest
{
    public partial class StorageAccount : Pulumi.CustomResource
    {
        public StorageAccount(string name, StorageAccountArgs args, ...)
        {
        }
    }

    public sealed class StorageAccountArgs : Pulumi.ResourceArgs
    {
        [Input("accessTier")]
        public Input<Pulumi.AzureNextGen.Storage.Latest.AccessTier>? AccessTier { get; set; }

        ...
    }
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< choosable language go >}}

```go
func NewStorageAccount(ctx *pulumi.Context,
name string, args *StorageAccountArgs, ...) (*StorageAccount, error) {
    ...
}

type StorageAccountArgs struct {
    AccessTier AccessTier
    ...
}
```

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

{{< chooser >}}
{{< choosable language typescript >}}

> **Note:** When using TypeScript, "strict" enums will accept both the constant (`AccessTier.Cool`) or the literal string (`"Cool"`). If there is an accidental spelling error in the literal, you are *immediately* alerted to the issue rather than having to wait until runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{% notes type="info" %}}
When using TypeScript, "strict" enums will accept both the constant (`AccessTier.Cool`) or the literal string (`"Cool"`). If there is an accidental spelling error in the literal, you are *immediately* alerted to the issue rather than having to wait until runtime.
{{% /notes %}}
```

![ENUM_ERROR_TYPESCRIPT](ts-enum-spelling.png)

{{< /choosable >}}
{{< /chooser >}}

### "Relaxed" enums

When a property is a "relaxed" enum, the property type is specified as the `Union` of the enum type and the underlying primitive type. This means that you have the convenience of using the enum constants (i.e., `s3.CannedAcl.Private`), but you may also pass in the raw string (i.e., `"private"`).

> In the AWS provider (and other Terraform-based providers), we have opted for **only** using "relaxed" enums. The reasoning here is twofold. Allowing the primitive type maintains backward compatibility and also allows users to use values that may not yet be represented in the Pulumi schema (e.g., a new Managed Policy ARN, EC2 Instance type, etc.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the AWS provider (and other Terraform-based providers), we have opted for **only** using "relaxed" enums. The reasoning is twofold. Allowing the primitive type maintains backward compatibility and also allows users to use values that may not yet be represented in the Pulumi schema (e.g., a new Managed Policy ARN, EC2 Instance type, etc.).
```
